Unify TLP and RTO into Probe Timeout (#2114)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-recovery.md

as by retransmitting the data, sending an updated frame, or abandoning the
frame.  For more information, see Section 13.2 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

> ## Ack-based Detection {#ack-loss-detection}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ACK-based Detection {#ack-loss-detection}
```

(kPacketThreshold) is 3, based on TCP loss detection {{?RFC5681}} {{?RFC6675}}.

Some networks may exhibit higher degrees of reordering, causing a sender to
detect spurious losses.  Implementers MAY increase the packet threshold under

> such conditions.

Reviewer 2: This change seems unrelated to the rest of the change.

Timeout loss detection recovers from losses that cannot be handled by
ack-based loss detection.  It uses a single timer which switches between

> a crypto retransmission timer and a Probe timer.

Reviewer 3: You don't capitalize `Probe` in other places. It looks out of place here.

packet is received.  The client MAY use this value to seed the RTT estimator for
a subsequent connection attempt to the server.

### Probe Timeout {#pto}

A Probe Timeout (PTO) triggers a probe packet when ack-eliciting data is in
flight but an acknowledgement is not received within the expected period of
time.  A PTO enables a connection to recover from loss of tail packets or acks,
where acks of subsequent packets are not available to trigger ack-based loss
detection.  The PTO algorithm used in QUIC implements the reliability functions
of Tail Loss Probe {{?TLP=I-D.dukkipati-tcpm-tcp-loss-probe}}, RTO {{?RFC5681}}
and F-RTO algorithms for TCP {{?RFC5682}}, and the computation is based on TCP's
retransmission timeout period {{?RFC6298}}.

#### Computing PTO

When an ack-eliciting packet is transmitted, the sender schedules a timer for
the PTO period as follows:

> PTO = max(smoothed_rtt + 4*rttvar + max_ack_delay, kGranularity)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~
PTO = max(smoothed_rtt + 4*rttvar + max_ack_delay, kGranularity)
~~~
```

A sender computes its PTO timer every time an ack-eliciting packet is sent. A
sender might choose to optimize this by setting the timer fewer times if it
knows that more ack-eliciting packets will be sent within a short period of
time.

#### Sending Probe Packets

When a PTO timer expires, the sender MUST send one ack-eliciting packet as a
probe. A sender MAY send up to two ack-eliciting packets, to avoid an expensive
consecutive PTO expiration due to a single packet loss.

Consecutive PTO periods increase exponentially, and as a result, connection
recovery latency increases exponentially as packets continue to be dropped in
the network.  Sending two packets on PTO expiration increases resilience to
packet drop in both directions, thus reducing the probability of consecutive PTO
events.

Probe packets sent on a PTO MUST be ack-eliciting.  A probe packet SHOULD carry
new data when possible.  A probe packet MAY carry retransmitted unacknowledged
data when new data is unavailable, when flow control does not permit new data to
be sent, or to opportunistically reduce loss recovery delay.  Implementers MAY
use alternate strategies for determining the content of probe packets, including

> sending new or retransmitted data based on the application's priorities.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, this is much better!

#### Loss Detection {#pto-loss}

> Delivery or loss of packets in flight is established when an acknowledgement is

Reviewer 2: Should this be "an ACK"?  We typically talk about an acknowledgement as referencing a single packet.

received that newly acknowledges one or more packets.  An endpoint might receive

> an acknowledgement after multiple consecutive PTO periods.

Reviewer 2: I feel like you're trying to say something more with this last sentence, but I'm not sure what?

packet is received.  The client MAY use this value to seed the RTT estimator for
a subsequent connection attempt to the server.

### Probe Timeout {#pto}

A Probe Timeout (PTO) triggers a probe packet when ack-eliciting data is in
flight but an acknowledgement does not seem forthcoming.  A PTO enables a
connection to recover from loss of tail packets or acks, where acks of
subsequent packets are not available to trigger ack-based loss detection.  The
PTO algorithm used in QUIC implements the reliability functions of Tail Loss
Probe {{?TLP=I-D.dukkipati-tcpm-tcp-loss-probe}}, RTO {{?RFC5681}} and F-RTO
algorithms for TCP {{?RFC5682}}, and the computation is based on TCP's
retransmission timeout period {{?RFC6298}}.

#### Computing PTO

> When the final ack-eliciting packet before quiescence is transmitted, the sender

Reviewer 2: Final is an optimization and we don't define quiescence
```suggestion
When an ack-eliciting packet is sent, the sender
```

schedules a timer for the PTO period as follows:

PTO = max(smoothed_rtt + 4*rttvar + max_ack_delay, kGranularity)

kGranularity, smoothed_rtt, rttvar, and max_ack_delay are defined in
{{ld-vars-of-interest}}.

> The PTO period is the amount of time that a sender ought to wait for an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The PTO period is the amount of time that a sender SHOULD wait for an
```

> acknowledgement for a sent packet to be received.  This time period includes the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
acknowledgement of a sent packet.  This time period includes the
```

> estimated network roundtrip-time (smoothed_rtt), the variance in the estimate

Reviewer 2: Using variance here is potentially confusing, since it's not true variance and it's 4*rttvar.

I'm having a hard time coming up with suggestions, but I'll think about it.

(4*rttvar), and max_ack_delay, to account for the maximum time by which a
receiver might delay sending an acknowledgement.

There is no requirement on the clock granularity. If the PTO computation results

> in a value of zero, a sender MUST set the PTO value to kGranularity, to avoid

Reviewer 2: How about "The PTO must be set to at least kGranularity,"

the timer expiring immediately.

> A PTO timer is set on an ack-eliciting tail packet.  A sender may not know that

Reviewer 2: Drop this first sentence and move the second sentence up with "When the final ack-eliciting packet"

a packet being sent is a tail packet and may have to adjust the timer every time
an ack-eliciting packet is sent.

When a PTO timer expires, the PTO period MUST be set to twice its current value.
This exponential reduction in the sender's rate is important because the PTOs
might be caused by loss of packets or acknowledgements due to severe congestion.

#### Sending Probe Packets

When a PTO timer expires, the sender MUST send one ack-eliciting packet as a
probe. A sender MAY send up to two ack-eliciting packets, to avoid an expensive

> consecutive PTO expiration due to packet loss.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consecutive PTO expiration due to a single packet loss.
```

Consecutive PTO periods increase exponentially, and as a result, connection
recovery latency increases exponentially as packets continue to be dropped in
the network.  Sending two packets on PTO expiration increases resilience to
packet drop in both directions, thus reducing the probability of consecutive PTO
events.

Probe packets sent on a PTO MUST be ack-eliciting.  A probe packet SHOULD carry
new data when possible.  Implementers MAY use alternate strategies for

> determining the content of probe packets.  An implementation could use new data

Reviewer 2: From "An implementation could" on, this paragraph seems quite speculative, and the first sentence is redundant to the above setence "A probe packet SHOULD carry new data when possible."

permit new data to be sent, or to opportunistically reduce loss recovery delay.
Alternatively, an implementation could send new or retransmitted data based on
the application's priorities.

#### Loss Detection {#pto-loss}

Delivery or loss of packets in flight is established when an acknowledgement is
received that newly acknowledges one or more packets.  An endpoint might receive
an acknowledgement after multiple consecutive PTO periods.

A PTO timer expiration event does not indicate packet loss and MUST NOT cause
prior unacknowledged packets to be marked as lost.  After a PTO timer has
expired, an endpoint uses the following rules to mark packets as lost when an
acknowledgement is received that newly acknowledges packets.

If an acknowledgement is received that newly acknowledges packets sent prior to
the first of one or more consecutive PTO expirations, the PTOs are considered
spurious.  Loss detection proceeds as dictated by packet and time threshold
mechanisms, see {{ack-loss-detection}}.

If an ACK frame is received that newly acknowledges only those packets that were
sent after a PTO timer expiration, all unacknowledged packets with lower packet

> numbers MUST be marked as lost.

Reviewer 2: This will happen naturally due to loss detection I believe.

packet is received.  The client MAY use this value to seed the RTT estimator for
a subsequent connection attempt to the server.

### Probe Timeout {#pto}

A Probe Timeout (PTO) triggers a probe packet when ack-eliciting data is in
flight but an acknowledgement is not received within the expected period of
time.  A PTO enables a connection to recover from loss of tail packets or acks.
The PTO algorithm used in QUIC implements the reliability functions of Tail Loss

> Probe {{?TLP=I-D.dukkipati-tcpm-tcp-loss-probe}}, RTO {{?RFC5681}} and F-RTO

Author: I think the function we're talking about is TLP, though I'm happy to add and cite RACK separately somewhere. I'll do that separately.

> Probe {{?TLP=I-D.dukkipati-tcpm-tcp-loss-probe}}, RTO {{?RFC5681}} and F-RTO

Reviewer 4: TLP is an expired draft in 2013 and RACK is standards track and active. Linux, FreeBSD and Windows are all implementing the RACK draft and TLP as specified in the RACK draft. I would just cite the RACK draft. There is a chance it may got into last call within the next two IETFs.

packet is received.  The client MAY use this value to seed the RTT estimator for
a subsequent connection attempt to the server.

### Probe Timeout {#pto}

A Probe Timeout (PTO) triggers a probe packet when ack-eliciting data is in
flight but an acknowledgement is not received within the expected period of
time.  A PTO enables a connection to recover from loss of tail packets or acks.
The PTO algorithm used in QUIC implements the reliability functions of Tail Loss
Probe {{?TLP=I-D.dukkipati-tcpm-tcp-loss-probe}} {{?RACK}}, RTO {{?RFC5681}} and
F-RTO algorithms for TCP {{?RFC5682}}, and the timeout computation is based on
TCP's retransmission timeout period {{?RFC6298}}.

#### Computing PTO

When an ack-eliciting packet is transmitted, the sender schedules a timer for
the PTO period as follows:

~~~

> PTO = max(smoothed_rtt + 4*rttvar + max_ack_delay, kGranularity)

Reviewer 4: Sorry just noticed another difference. If peer advertises max_ack_delay as 0 (which seems to be legal), then first PTO becomes Srtt + 4 * RttVar, whereas in TCP the first PTO is 2* Srtt. If variance is low this may be too aggressive? Should we also do PTO = max (PTO, 2 *Srtt) ?

Author: I'll push back against this. I like the simplicity of having a single computation that includes rttvar. What is the rationale in TCP for using 2xSRTT when RTTVAR is available? If variance is low, that still seems like the right thing to do. Why inflate the PTO when you don't need to?

FWIW, the first PTO is akin to the first TLP. The second PTO would be backed off, so you will automatically get 2 x (SRTT + 4xRTTVAR).

Reviewer 4: Quoting RACK draft:

Aiming for a PTO value of 2*SRTT allows a sender to wait long enough
   to know that an ACK is overdue.  Under normal circumstances, i.e. no
   losses, an ACK typically arrives in one SRTT.  But choosing PTO to be
   exactly an SRTT is likely to generate spurious probes given that
   network delay variance and even end-system timings can easily push an
   ACK to be above an SRTT.  We chose PTO to be the next integral
   multiple of SRTT.

   Similarly, network delay variations and end-system processing
   latencies and timer granularities can easily delay ACKs beyond
   2*SRTT, so senders SHOULD add at least 2ms to a computed PTO value
   (and MAY add more if the sending host OS timer granularity is more
   coarse than 1ms).

Author: @pravb: Thanks for the context -- I should have just looked at the RACK draft. So, to be clear, the RACK draft does not use this 2ms when WCDelAckT is used, that is, when it accounts for the worst case delayed ack timer. This is what we expect max_ack_delay to do for us, but as you note, a receiver might send 0 here. 

I think we should put the onus of this onto the receiver.  A receiver should send the worst case ack delay in max_ack_delay. A receiver that doesn't do that shoots itself in the foot by causing spurious retransmissions at the sender. We may want to add some strong wording about how a receiver should choose max ack delay, I've filed #2186 for that.

Sound reasonable?

Reviewer 4: That's reasonable. So this is how we'd justify the deviation from TCP:
1. Include RttVar component in the computation for in network variability. 
2. Require the receiver to include the perturbation for system processing delays. So 2186 needs to add a SHOULD for adding a perturbation value on top of the actual max ack delay. I'll comment there.

  considers a packet lost. Specified as an RTT multiplier. The RECOMMENDED
  value is 9/8.

> kGranularity:

Reviewer 2: It feels odd to define this here, but use it three times up above.  I'd suggest discussing the idea that you're using clock granularity above where you first use it.

  considers a packet lost. Specified as an RTT multiplier. The RECOMMENDED
  value is 9/8.

kGranularity:

: Timer granularity. This is a system-dependent value.  However, implementations
  SHOULD use a value no smaller than 1ms.

kDelayedAckTimeout:
: The length of the peer's delayed ack timer. The RECOMMENDED value is 25ms.

> kInitialRtt:

Author: Would you mind opening a separate issue for this? I'd argue for 100ms, but I don't want to do it in this PR. FWIW, I think the cost of an early timeout is not high, so having this be aggressive seems fine to me.

> kInitialRtt:

Reviewer 2: Agreed, that's a separable issue, which was previously raised and then I believe closed.

> kInitialRtt:

Reviewer 4: Ok I will open a separate issue. This will cause unnecessary timeouts for CI and 0-RTT data on many Internet paths. And pretty much always on satellite links. If we want to pick a magic number then let's pick 200 msec or 300 msec (the historical minrto values for Linux and Windows respectively).

> kInitialRtt:

Reviewer 5: Here are 10 ping packets from Denmark to China

10 packets transmitted, 10 packets received, 0.0% packet loss
round-trip min/avg/max/stddev = 211.218/350.768/593.271/149.383 ms

> kInitialRtt:

Reviewer 5: And here from Denmark to New York, which is basically a direct sea cable link.

10 packets transmitted, 10 packets received, 0.0% packet loss
round-trip min/avg/max/stddev = 103.982/104.505/105.343/0.475 ms

> kInitialRtt:

Reviewer 5: And Denmark New Zealand

10 packets transmitted, 10 packets received, 0.0% packet loss
round-trip min/avg/max/stddev = 324.042/454.764/672.469/122.684 ms

      // Find the smallest newly acknowledged packet
      smallest_newly_acked =
        FindSmallestNewlyAcked(newly_acked_packets)
      // If any packets sent prior to PTO were acked, then the
      // PTO was spurious. Otherwise, inform congestion control.
      if (pto_count > 0 &&

>             smallest_newly_acked > largest_sent_before_pto):

Reviewer 2: You could define a kNumCongestivePtoPackets here and add it here and then define it above to be the number of PTOs you will treat as standard packet loss, and not extreme congestion.

Reviewer: What is "extreme congestion" ?

Author: @martinthomson : @ianswett is trying to capture the difference in congestion response that the current loss recovery spec has for TLP vs. RTO. The idea is to say that for a couple of PTOs, there will be a smaller reduction in cwnd, and after that, the cwnd will be collapsed. I can write that up.

      // RTO was spurious. Otherwise, inform congestion control.
      if (rto_count > 0 &&

>             smallest_newly_acked > largest_sent_before_rto):

Reviewer 6: largest_sent_before_rto is still used here

Reviewer 3: As well as `rto_count`

        timeout = 2 * kInitialRtt
      else:
        timeout = 2 * smoothed_rtt

>       timeout = max(timeout, granularity)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      timeout = max(timeout, kGranularity)
```

Reviewer 2: If you want to use granularity, then you need to define it above.  Otherwise, use kGranularity as suggested.

      loss_detection_timer.set(loss_time)
      return

    // Calculate PTO duration
    timeout =
      smoothed_rtt + 4 * rttvar + max_ack_delay

>     timeout = max(timeout, granularity)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    timeout = max(timeout, kGranularity)
```

      loss_detection_timer.set(loss_time)
      return

>     // PTO timer. Calculate PTO duration

Reviewer 3: Nit: I feel like having either `PTO timer` or `Calculate PTO duration` would be cleaner. Having both seems a bit overdone.

     else if (loss_time != 0):
       // Time threshold loss Detection
       DetectLostPackets(largest_acked_packet)
     else:
       // PTO.

>        if (pto_count == 0)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       if (pto_count == 0):
```

losses or increases in the ECN-CE counter.

## Probe Timeout

Probe packets MUST NOT be blocked by the congestion controller.  A sender MUST
however count these packets as being additionally in flight, since these packets
adds network load without establishing packet loss.  Note that sending probe
packets might cause the sender's bytes in flight to exceed the congestion window
until an acknowledgement is received that establishes loss or delivery of
packets.

> If two consecutive PTOs have occurred (pto_count is at least 3), the network is

Reviewer 2: +1, I'm confused.  Also, this should be more about the number of PTOs that were lost than the number sent.   ie: I could send 3 PTOs, then the network returns to normal, no packets were lost, and the connection continues.

> If two consecutive PTOs have occurred (pto_count is at least 3), the network is

Author: This is based on the number of timeouts that happened, not based on packets sent.  We want cwnd collapse at the equivalent of the first RTO's occurrence. This is the third timeout (2 TLP timeouts and then 1 RTO), which means pto_count is at least 3. Or am I doing this math wrong?

> If two consecutive PTOs have occurred (pto_count is at least 3), the network is

Reviewer 7: To me it seems that "pto_count is at least 3" is correct, however "If two consecutive PTOs have occurred" is incorrect and needs to be changed to "If three...".

> If two consecutive PTOs have occurred (pto_count is at least 3), the network is

Reviewer 4: IIRC Ian was going to get data on whether we need 2 TLPs or just one is sufficient. FWIW we only do one TLP in Windows TCP. Yes at the least please fix as Kazuho says: "if three consecutive PTOs have occurred"

losses or increases in the ECN-CE counter.

## Probe Timeout

Probe packets MUST NOT be blocked by the congestion controller.  A sender MUST
however count these packets as being additionally in flight, since these packets
adds network load without establishing packet loss.  Note that sending probe

> packets might cause the sender's estimated bytes in flight to exceed the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
packets might cause the sender's bytes in flight to exceed the
```

> sender's congestion window until an acknowledgement is received that establishes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
congestion window until an acknowledgement is received that establishes
```

Reviewer 2: Also, I think this would read better as "until packets are acknowledged or lost."

loss or delivery of packets.

A PTO expiration is classified as spurious or valid when an ACK frame is
received that newly acknowledges packets in flight, see {{pto-loss}}.  On a
valid PTO, the congestion window MUST be reduced to the minimum congestion

> window and slow start is re-entered.

Reviewer 3: Just to confirm my understanding, this is a difference from TLP before, right? Before this change, if TLP triggered and you sent a probe packet that elicited an ACK for just that packet, you wouldn't go back into slow start, but now an ACK for only the first probe packet would trigger slow start. Correct?

Reviewer 2: Agreed, this is a potentially substantial change.

Reviewer 2: If you have a lot of tails(ie: HTTP traffic), then it doesn't take too many packet losses to end up hitting this.  TLP was targeted partially at cases like that, and I think you'll find changing it will produce measurable performance regressions in web traffic.  We can do something else in a follow-up, but as I said before, I'd prefer text saying SHOULD consider an acknowledgement of the first PTO as standard packet loss, not extreme congestion, and treat it as such.

Author: I'm going to simplify this further. I think that having a verification is unnecessary; the behavior ends up being the same whether a PTO is verified or not. I can retain this notion of reducing the cwnd differently for the first 2 PTOs and then collapsing it to min_cwnd after that.

: Reduction in congestion window when a new loss event is detected.
  The RECOMMENDED value is 0.5.

kPersistentCongestion:
: Number of consecutive PTOs after which network is considered to be
  experiencing persistent congestion.  The rationale for this threshold is to
  enable a sender to use initial PTOs for aggressive probing, similar to Tail
  Loss Probe (TLP) in TCP {{TLP}} {{RACK}}.  Once the number of consecutive PTOs
  reaches this threshold - that is, persistent congestion is established - the
  sender responds by collapsing its congestion window, similar to a

>   Retransmission Timeout (RTO) in TCP {{RFC5681}}.  The RECOMMENDED value is 3,

Reviewer 2: The pseudocode below decreases CWND to kMinimumWindow, which is 2 packets.  I think sticking with that makes sense, at least for now.  It also requires less text to justify.

Author: The recommendation is 3 for kPersistentCongestion, not for the value of cwnd. I'll change the text a bit to clarify.

       congestion_window *= kLossReductionFactor
       congestion_window = max(congestion_window, kMinimumWindow)
       ssthresh = congestion_window
       // Collapse congestion window if persistent congestion

>        if (pto_count > 2):

Reviewer 2: 2 is a magic number.  Previously we said you SHOULD have 2 TLPs, but you could have fewer.  I think it makes sense to define this as a constant and explain its reason for existing there?

Reviewer 4: I commented on the thread above this. Yes we should settle on one or two TLPs. I personally prefer one but unfortunately I don't have data to say if two is better since Windows TCP has been doing just one TLP.

Author: @siyengar : In this case, by the time 5 is acked, 3 and 4 should be marked as lost by the time-threshold loss detection mechanism, since they're going to be > 1.125 x SRTT in the past.

     CongestionEvent(largest_lost_packet.time)
~~~

### On Probe Timeout Verified

QUIC decreases the congestion window to the minimum value once the probe timeout
has been verified and removes any packets sent before the newly acknowledged
packet.

~~~

>    OnProbeTimeoutVerified(packet_number)

Reviewer 6: This looks like we will set the probetimeout verified even if this happens

    1, 2, 3 [lost], 4 [probe], 5 [probe]
    -> [ack 4]
    -> cwnd = mincwnd

in the first probe case it seems like the probe would be aggressive so it would be bad to drop the cwnd down.

even if it not aggressive right now, in the future I think we are going to tune timeouts constant per application (realtime vs interactive). This means that if we tune timeout constants too aggressively, it will result in having this reaction.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest we keep a "you can not do the CWND reduction on the first or 2nd PTO" to keep behavior more similar to what QUIC has now.
